Salt Analysis

I) Physical examination

a) Color - White - Copper, Ferrous, Nickel, Cobalt, Manganese ions absent.
         - Blue - Above mentioned ions may be present.

b) Smell - No specific odour - Ammonium, Sulphur, Acetate ions absent.
         - Ammoniacal odour - Ammonium, Sulphur, Acetate ions may be present.
         - Characteristic vinegar - Acetate ions may be present.

II) Dry heating test

-Heated a pinch of salt in a dry test tube

a) Gas evolved - Reddish brown - Nitrate ion may be present.
               - Yellowish white - Chlorine ion may be present.
               - Colorless
               -> without any specific smell - Carbonate ion may be present.
               -> with pungent smell - Sulphur DiOxide, Sulphate may be present.
               -> with vinegar like smell - Acetate ions may be present.



b) Sublimation - no sublimate formed - Ammonium halides, Aluminum chloride may
                 be absent.
               - White sublimate formed - Ammonium ions, Aluminum Chloride may
                 be present.

c) Decrepitation
-> Crackling Sound observed - Lead Nitrate, Barium Nitrate, Sodium Chloride may
                              be present.
-> No Crackling Sound - Lead Nitrate, Barium Nitrate, Potassium Chloride absent.

d) Color of residue - Yellow - Zinc, Lead, Cadmium ions may be present.
                    - White or no residue - Zinc, Lead, Cadmium ions absent.
                    - White on prolonged heating - Zinc, Lead ions absent.
                    - Black on prolonged heating - Acetate ions may be present.

III) Dilute Sulphuric Acid test - treated a pinch of Salt with dilute sulphuric
 acid
-> No gas evolved - Carbonate, Sulphur, Sulphite absent.

-> Brisk effervescence of Carbon Dioxide gas - Carbonate, Sulphur, Sulphite ions
may be present

If no gas evolved
IV) Potassium Permanganate test - To a pinch of salt, add dilute Sulphuric Acid,
   and a drop of Potassium Permanganate solution.
-> If the pink color of the Potassium Permanganate solution is not discharged -
   Chlorine, Bromine, Iodine, Ferrous ions are absent.
-> Pink color is discharged - above mentioned ions may be present.

If pink color is discharged
V) Test for halogens (Chlorine|Bromine|Iodine) - Silver Nitrate Test
  -Treat a pinch of salt with dilute nitric acid solution, boil, cool, and add
   Silver Nitrate Solution.
   -> White precipitate formed - Chlorine ion confirmed.

If pink color isn't discharged
V) Concentrated Sulphuric Acid test

  -Heat a pinch of salt with concentrated Sulphuric Acid and add a pellet.
   -> If a reddish brown gas evolves, which turns Ferrous Sulphate solution
      black - Nitrate may be present.
   -> If a colorless gas with vinegar like smell is evolved, acetate ions may
      be present.

If reddish brown gas
VI) Confirmatory test for nitrate
a) Copper Chips
-> Heat a pinch of salt with concentrated Sulphuric acid and a few Copper chips
   - if a reddish-brown gas is evolved - Nitrate confirmed.
b) Brown Ring test - To 2 ml of salt solution add freshly prepared Ferrous
   Sulphate solution. Add concentrated Sulphuric Acid along the sides of the
   test tube carefully - If a brown ring is formed at the junction of the two
   layers - Nitrate confirmed.

If colorless gas with vinegar like smell
VI) Confirmatory test for Acetate
a) Oxalic acid test:
-> In a watch glass, mix a pinch of salt with solid oxalic acid, to make a fine
   paste. Rub the paste and smell. Vinegar like smell confirms the presence of
   acetate ions.
b) Ferric Chloride test:
-> To the salt solution, add neutral Ferric Chloride solution. If a reddish
   brown filtrate is obtained, filter it.
i) To one part, add dilute HCl. The color should disappear
ii) To the other part, add water and boil. A reddish brown precipitate should be
    obtained.
Both these tests will confirm the presence of Acetate ions.

If a Carbon Dioxide is evolved in Step III

IV) Confirmatory Test for Carbonate ion

Treat a pinch of salt with dilute sulphuric acid, and pass the evolved gas
through lime water - If the lime water turns milky - Carbonate confirmed

VI) If dilute and concentrated sulphuric acid tests not given.
The given salt may contain Sulphate or Phosphate radicals.

-> Confirmatory test for Sulphate
a) Barium Chloride test:
   Treat a pinch of salt with water, and add a few drops of Barium Chloride
   solution. If a white precipitate insoluble in dilute HCl is formed, the
   presence of Sulphate ion is confirmed.
b) Lead Acetate test:
   Treat a pinch of salt with water, add Lead Acetate solution. If a white
   precipitate soluble in excess hot ammonium acetate solution is formed,
   presence of Sulphate confirmed.

ACIDIC RADICAL DONE

Basic Radical :-

I) Sodium Hydroxide Test
   Treated a pinch of salt with NaOH Solution
   -> No smell of Ammonia - Group zero (Ammonium ion) absent.
   -> Ammoniacal/Smell of Ammonia gas - Group zero (Ammonium ion may be present)

If Ammonia is smelt
II) Confirmatory test for Ammonium Ion
-> Nessler's Test - Treat salt solution with a few drops of Nessler's reagent.
If a red-brownish precipitate is formed, Ammonium ion confirmed.

If Ammonium is not smelt

II) Preparation of OS (Original solution)
Dissolve a pinch of salt in water - Clear Solution obtained - labeled as OS

III) Added 1 ml of dilute Hydrochloric Acid to the OS
-> White precipitate obtained - Group I (Lead ion) present.
-> No precipitate formed - Group I (Lead ion) absent.

If Group I present
IV) Confirmatory test for Lead ion
    -> Add Potassium Iodide Solution to the OS - If a Yellow precipitate is
       obtained - Lead confirmed.

If Group I absent
IV) Pass Hydrogen Sulphide gas through a part of OS
-> No precipitate formed - Group II (Copper|Ferrous ions) absent.
-> If a black precipitate is formed, Group II is present.

If Group II present
V) Dissolve the above precipitate in minimum quantity of Nitric acid solution,
   add dilute Sulphuric acid and Alcohol+Ammonium Hydroxide solution in excess.
   If a blue colored solution is obtained, Copper ions are present.

VI) Confirmatory test for Copper - Potassium Ferro-cyanide Test
-> Add some Acetic acid+Potassium Ferro-cyanide solution to a part of the above
   blue solution. If a chocolate brown precipitate is obtained, the presence of
   Copper ions is confirmed.

If Group II absent
V) Add a pinch of solid Ammonium Chloride to OS. Boil, cool, add excess of
   Ammonium Hydroxide.
-> White precipitate formed - Group III (Aluminum|Ferric ions) present.

If Group III present
VI) Confirmatory test for Aluminum ions - Lake Test
-> To a part of above precipitate, add dilute Hydrochloric acid solution, add a
   few drops of blue litmus solution, add Ammonium Hydroxide solution drop wise.
   If a blue lake (blue precipitate floating in solution) is observed, presence
   of aluminum is confirmed.

If Group III absent
VI) Pass Hydrogen Sulphide Gas through the above solution. If a white
     precipitate is formed, Group IV (Zinc|Manganese|Nickel ions) may be
     present. Else it may be absent.

If Group IV present
VII) Confirmatory test for Zinc
-> Dissolve the above precipitate in dilute Hydrochloric acid solution, boil,
   cool, and add Potassium ferro-cyanide solution. If a bluish-white precipitate
   is formed, presence of Zinc is confirmed.

If Group IV absent
VII)
To a part of the above solution, add ammonium carbonate solution. If a white
precipitate is formed, Group V (Calcium|Barium ions) is present.

If Group V present
VIII) Confirmatory test for Calcium
-> Dissolve the above obtained precipitate in hot dilute Acetic acid, add 1 ml 
   of Ammonium oxalate solution, add Ammonium hydroxide, and scratch the sides 
   of the test tube. If a white precipitate is obtained, presence of Calcium is
   confirmed.
-> Flame Test - Treat the original salt with concentrated Hydrochloric acid to
                make a fine paste, then using platinum wire, put into a flame.
                If a brick red color flame is obtained - Calcium confirmed.
